create.md, before:

# How to create partie_hat


## Step 1. Create the FOCUS taxonomy file

I started with our [spreadsheet of annotated PATRIC data](patric_metadata_20180526_environments.tsv) and kept only those rows for which we have an Environment annotated in a sheet called [patric metadata 20180526 environments only](patric_metadata_20180526_environments_only.tsv).

Then, I selected just the first few columns of that spreadsheet to get the PATRIC ID, Organism name, taxonomy ID, etc. That way I'm working with a smaller spreadsheet for the rest of the work. This is a smaller file called [patric organisms](patric_organisms.tsv)
 
```
cut -f 1,2,3,4 patric_metadata_20180526_environments_only.tsv > patric_organisms.tsv
```

Next, I add the taxnomy to that file using the `patric_add_taxonomy.py` script from the [Edwards Lab repo](https://github.com/linsalrob/EdwardsLab).


```
python3 /home3/redwards/EdwardsLab/ncbi/patric_add_taxonomy.py -f patric_organisms.tsv -o patric_organisms_taxonomy.tsv 
```

To make sure all the rows have the same number of cells I use this perl oneliner:

```
perl -ne '@a=split /\t/; print "$#a\n"' patric_organisms_taxonomy.tsv | sort | uniq -c
```

FOCUS needs a file that has the source file name and then tab-separated values for _Kingdom, phylum, class, order, family, genus, species,_ and _strain_, but we don't have strain. Which is perfect, because I want to make sure we have included the PATRIC ID in our genome names in a way we can easily parse them from the FOCUS output. So I ammend the file with one more column for the strain.

```
perl -npe 'chomp; @a=split /\t/; $_.="\t$a[$#a] PATRIC|$a[0]\n"' patric_organisms_taxonomy.tsv > patric_organisms_taxonomy_strain.tsv
```

At this point I just manually edit the first line to change the column header of the last column to _strain_.

Now our strain information looks something like this for a _Salmonella Typhimurium_ strain:

| PATRIC ID | Name | Tax ID | Kingdom | phylum | class | order | family | genus | species | strain |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|--- |
| 28901.1301 | Salmonella enterica strain CFSAN045023 | 28901 | Bacteria | Proteobacteria | Gammaproteobacteria | Enterobacterales | Enterobacteriaceae | Salmonella | Salmonella enterica | Salmonella enterica PATRIC&#124;28901.1301

Note that the species includes PATRIC|genomeid.

## Step 2. Rebuild the _k_-mer databases

I edited focus to allow users to specify their own database locations by adding a -b tag. This means we can run focus.py in parallel and process a lot of genomes at once. There are a couple of options for this, but for this option I'm going to use a multicore machine and use 30 different processes.


To create the focus databases, first, we rename the first column in the file to make it a pointer to a fasta file that we want to count k-mers for. We also use this opportunity to remove the extraneous columns from the file

```
perl -npe '@a=split /\t/; $a[0] = "\$HOME/PATRIC/fna/$a[0].fna"; splice(@a, 1, 3), $_=join("\t", @a)' patric_organisms_taxonomy_strain.tsv > files_to_process.txt
```

We now have a file called `files_to_process.txt` that has one entry per line that is only the filenames and taxa, including our new species designation. Note that to get here we used several intermediate files, if desired we could clean those up now. 

I want to process these in parallel since I have a machine with lots of memory and lots of cores. In this case, I'm going to run 30 jobs simultaneously. 

Let's start by splitting the input file, `files_to_process.txt` into 30 smaller files. It's easier if each of those has a numeric file name, and we want to ensure that the files are split by number of lines, rather than by number of bytes, so that each file starts and ends with a complete command. We use the `split` command for that:
 
```
split -d -l 2351 files_to_process.txt
```

This makes a series of files named x00, x01, x02, ... x28, x29.


Because we are going to process everything simultaneously it is much easier if we move everything to its own directory. We can always concatenate everything later (and we will ...). Lets make 30 directories, move the split files into those directories and rename them to input (in their own directories we don't mind if they all have the same name), and while we're at it make the db directory that focus needs to add to the database. The last thing focus needs is the first line of the database that just contains the header information. We'll steal that from another focus database while we're at it.

 
```
for JOB in $(seq 1 30); do
	mkdir $JOB;
	mv x$JOB $JOB/input;
	mkdir -p $JOB/output/db;
	for K in 6 7 8; do
		head -n 1 /usr/local/genome/focus/current/db/k$K > $JOB/output/db/k$K;
	done;
done
```

Notice that this did most of it, but there were a few errors. Split uses x00, x01, x02, ... and so we need to move those few files separately:

```
for JOB in $(seq 1 9); do mv x0$JOB $JOB/input; done
```

and finally the last one (just because I counted from 1 not 0 earlier):

```
mv x00 30/input
```
 

Now that we're all set with an input file, an output directory, and the basis of the _k_-mer database in each directory, we can run the same command each time. Note that I use the ampersand here to put the job in the background, but because I'm doing that in a _for_ loop I use echo to carry on.

```
CWD=$PWD; for JOB in $(seq 1 30); do cd $JOB; python2.7 ~/GitHubs/FOCUS/focus.py -b output/ -d input > stdout 2> stderr & echo $JOB; cd $CWD; done
```

We now have 30 instances of focus building us databases!

```

Commit message:

how to make the databases

create.md, after:

# How to create partie_hat


## Step 1. Create the FOCUS taxonomy file

I started with our [spreadsheet of annotated PATRIC data](patric_metadata_20180526_environments.tsv) and kept only those rows for which we have an Environment annotated in a sheet called [patric metadata 20180526 environments only](patric_metadata_20180526_environments_only.tsv).

Then, I selected just the first few columns of that spreadsheet to get the PATRIC ID, Organism name, taxonomy ID, etc. That way I'm working with a smaller spreadsheet for the rest of the work. This is a smaller file called [patric organisms](patric_organisms.tsv)
 
```
cut -f 1,2,3,4 patric_metadata_20180526_environments_only.tsv > patric_organisms.tsv
```

Next, I add the taxnomy to that file using the `patric_add_taxonomy.py` script from the [Edwards Lab repo](https://github.com/linsalrob/EdwardsLab).


```
python3 /home3/redwards/EdwardsLab/ncbi/patric_add_taxonomy.py -f patric_organisms.tsv -o patric_organisms_taxonomy.tsv 
```

To make sure all the rows have the same number of cells I use this perl oneliner:

```
perl -ne '@a=split /\t/; print "$#a\n"' patric_organisms_taxonomy.tsv | sort | uniq -c
```

FOCUS needs a file that has the source file name and then tab-separated values for _Kingdom, phylum, class, order, family, genus, species,_ and _strain_, but we don't have strain. Which is perfect, because I want to make sure we have included the PATRIC ID in our genome names in a way we can easily parse them from the FOCUS output. So I ammend the file with one more column for the strain.

```
perl -npe 'chomp; @a=split /\t/; $_.="\t$a[$#a] PATRIC|$a[0]\n"' patric_organisms_taxonomy.tsv > patric_organisms_taxonomy_strain.tsv
```

At this point I just manually edit the first line to change the column header of the last column to _strain_.

Now our strain information looks something like this for a _Salmonella Typhimurium_ strain:

| PATRIC ID | Name | Tax ID | Kingdom | phylum | class | order | family | genus | species | strain |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|--- |
| 28901.1301 | Salmonella enterica strain CFSAN045023 | 28901 | Bacteria | Proteobacteria | Gammaproteobacteria | Enterobacterales | Enterobacteriaceae | Salmonella | Salmonella enterica | Salmonella enterica PATRIC&#124;28901.1301

Note that the species includes PATRIC|genomeid.

## Step 2. Make new _k_-mer databases for FOCUS

We want to make a set of _k_-mer databases for [FOCUS](https://github.com/metageni/focus) that just have our well annotated bacteria in them.

I edited focus to allow users to specify their own database locations by adding a -b tag. This means we can run focus.py in parallel and process a lot of genomes at once. There are a couple of options for this, but for this option I'm going to use a multicore machine and use 30 different processes. _[Note: I've created a GitHub pull request for this, but you can also use my fork of FOCUS]_

By default, focus provides three different database sizes, _k_=6, _k_=7, and _k_=8. Each database has the first line dedicated to a header line, that has the taxonomic groups (kingdom, phylum, class, order, family, genus, species, and strain), and the remaining columns as the _k_-mer sequences. Then we have one entry per line that has the organism information and the counts associated with that organism. We can reuse the header lines from other files as necessary, and add our own organisms and counts to that file.


To create the focus databases, first, we rename the first column in the file to make it a pointer to a fasta file that we want to count k-mers for. We also use this opportunity to remove the extraneous columns from the file

```
perl -npe '@a=split /\t/; $a[0] = "\$HOME/PATRIC/fna/$a[0].fna"; splice(@a, 1, 3), $_=join("\t", @a)' patric_organisms_taxonomy_strain.tsv > files_to_process.txt
```

We now have a file called `files_to_process.txt` that has one entry per line that is only the filenames and taxa, including our new species designation. Note that to get here we used several intermediate files, if desired we could clean those up now. 

I want to process these in parallel since I have a machine with lots of memory and lots of cores. In this case, I'm going to run 30 jobs simultaneously. 

Let's start by splitting the input file, `files_to_process.txt` into 30 smaller files. It's easier if each of those has a numeric file name, and we want to ensure that the files are split by number of lines, rather than by number of bytes, so that each file starts and ends with a complete command. We use the `split` command for that:
 
```
split -d -l 2351 files_to_process.txt
```

This makes a series of files named x00, x01, x02, ... x28, x29.


Because we are going to process everything simultaneously it is much easier if we move everything to its own directory. We can always concatenate everything later (and we will ...). Lets make 30 directories, move the split files into those directories and rename them to input (in their own directories we don't mind if they all have the same name), and while we're at it make the db directory that focus needs to add to the database. The last thing focus needs is the first line of the database that just contains the header information. We'll steal that from another focus database while we're at it.

 
```
for JOB in $(seq 1 30); do
	mkdir $JOB;
	mv x$JOB $JOB/input;
	mkdir -p $JOB/output/db;
	for K in 6 7 8; do
		head -n 1 /usr/local/genome/focus/current/db/k$K > $JOB/output/db/k$K;
	done;
done
```

Notice that this did most of it, but there were a few errors. Split uses x00, x01, x02, ... and so we need to move those few files separately:

```
for JOB in $(seq 1 9); do mv x0$JOB $JOB/input; done
```

and finally the last one (just because I counted from 1 not 0 earlier):

```
mv x00 30/input
```
 

Now that we're all set with an input file, an output directory, and the basis of the _k_-mer database in each directory, we can run the same command each time. Note that I use the ampersand here to put the job in the background, but because I'm doing that in a _for_ loop I use echo to carry on.

```
CWD=$PWD; for JOB in $(seq 1 30); do cd $JOB; python2.7 ~/GitHubs/FOCUS/focus.py -b output/ -d input > stdout 2> stderr & echo $JOB; cd $CWD; done
```

We now have 30 instances of focus building us databases!

### Combine the _k_-mer databases

Once the processing is complete we need to combine the _k_-mer databases. Recall that each database has a header with the phylogenetic classification followed by the _k_-mer sequence, so we need to get that first. Then we can just concatenate the sequences from the partial databases. The order of the sequences in the databases doesn't matter.

```
for K in 6 7 8; do echo $K; head -n 1 1/output/db/k$K > db/k$K; grep -hv ^Kingdom */output/db/k$K >> db/k${K}.full; done
```

Then we need to filter out entries that are all zero. There is no point in keeping them in the database and we don't need to parse them each time we load it. These entries exist when the fasta file for the genome doesn't exist.

```
for K in 6 7 8; do perl -ne 'if (/^Kingdom/) {print; next} @a=split /\t/; $c=0; map {$c+=$a[$_]} (9 .. $#a); print if ($c > 0)' db/k${K}.full > db/k$K; done
```
